---
layout: page
title: Context
permalink: /context/
order: 1
---
The sixteen volumes of handmade scrapbooks of ephemera by Scottish poet Edwin Morgan (1920-2010), held at the University of Glasgow, contain over 3600 pages and tens of thousands of individual clippings. As resonant a resource as they are for researchers interested in twentieth-century Scottish literature, culture and history, they are also a prime example of a collection that emblematises the challenges facing libraries wishing to make their materials available online. As Deazley et al. remark on the [Digitising the Edwin Morgan Scrapbooks project website]((http://digitisingmorgan.org)), 'when decisions about the digitisation of heritage collections are influenced by the copyright status of the material itself, this skews the digital cultural record.' Despite their socio-cultural value, the size, weight, and density of information of the Morgan scrapbooks raise significant material and financial barriers to publication, added to the copyright issues and the fact that even if they were photographed, much material information is lost in this process. Grappling with the material and legal challenges opens a range of questions about what is made possible by digital media while also continuing Morgan's own desire to circulate the scrapbooks publicly (Morgan himself tried unsuccessfully to have the scrapbooks published twice). 

This project seeks to confront these challenges by constructing, and theorising, a digital prototype which will represent aspects of the Morgan scrapbooks so as to go beyond a straightforward digitisation which captures a photographic representation of the page and little else. It will employ information visualisation principles in order to represent aspects of the materiality of the page, and will explore the possibilities raised by text analysis methods such as topic modelling and word vectors in order to find ways of grasping the thematic and semantic content of the scrapbooks while evading breaches of copyright. The project aims to create a digital artefact that will bring out as many of the elements of the Morgan scrapbooks as possible: their networked qualities, the manifold resonances between images and scraps of texts, the structure of individual pages and the semantic relationships and thematic preoccupations visible across the scrapbooks as a whole.
